Pilates for Beginners

Working with the Seacoast and beyond since 2013, The Pilates room is located in downtown Portsmouth, NH. 

Reformer Pilates here

Pilates for Beginners is as an alternative to weight bearing exercises that impact your joints. There is no impact on your joints in practicing Reformer Pilates. One of the main benefits of Reformer Pilates is that you can improve strength and flexibility using body resistance along with balance and coordination. You will feel the difference in one session. It may take a few weeks to build total body strength, depending on both limitations, learning curve, and commitment. 

Pilates basics

There are two main practices to learn as a Pilates student and both are incredibly important! The awesome thing about Pilates is that you absolutely going to feel your whole body working together in every exercise. Historically and designed by Joseph Pilates (1840-1920), Pilates had been taught with spring-loaded tension on beds. Now known as Reformer Pilates. The spring-loaded tension is perfect to learn alignment principles and the focus for Pilates for Beginners is to breathe while moving the carriage. This is a total body workout that focuses on form, breathing, and moving with control. 

Other benefits of using the Reformer for Pilates for Beginners are to train body mind awareness, increase strength, stability, stretching, and stamina. Working on the Reformer, in The Pilates Room fully equipped studio also includes using the Cadillac, Wunda Chairs, Tower, Barrel, and Jump Board. The Reformer is a large prop that works great to learn as Pilates for Beginner program. The feedback from the spring tension and the guided instruction in a private session is perfect for individuals who are new to Pilates. We offer both private and semi-private sessions @ The Pilates Room. 

View on us on social media @ Michele McCauley (@the_pilates_room) • Instagram photos and videos

@ (6) The Pilates Room, Pilates, Yoga and Nutrition | Facebook

Mat Pilates vs Reformer Pilates

Mat Pilates is another wonderful way to practice Pilates for Beginners. The classes are one hour long and learning the mat practice is great to do without equipment. These classes are versatile and focus on both form and breathing in each exercise. In the mat practice, body resistance is a bit more challenging for new students. The rollup is one example that is more challenging to perform on the mat versus the Reformer, since there is no guided resistance. Once the core and back muscles become stronger using the Reformer, it will be easier to progress to the mat series. 

Mat Pilates is a wonderful practice to incorporate into your strength training routine. How often do you practice for best results? We recommend twice per week for beginners. The mat practice includes exercises similar to the Reformer Pilates machine. Some of these exercises are the hundred, rollup, spine stretch, saw, swan and side hip series. Spinal function becomes the main focus in every exercise on both the mat and Reformer Pilates machine. 

Learn more about us @ Blog Archives – The Pilates Room (thepilatesroomnh.com)

Working with Southern New Hampshire and surrounding areas in Dover, Hampton, Rye, Portsmouth, New Castle, Exeter, Stratham, and southern Maine areas in Kittery, Eliot and York.